the way to overcome that hurdle is to is
to look at the process and say okay I
understand that if I do this regularly
and enough that the world will move
itself to meet me it's just my same with
my daughter the world moved itself to
say oh you are now self-possessed we
will treat you as such yeah or you are
now loving yourself so we're going to
surround you with people who love you
[Music]
welcome back to the art of
accomplishment where we explore living
the life you want with enjoyment and
ease today we're going to talk about how
to stop seeking the approval of others
and speak your truth and we're going to
offer some tips and practices to help
you embody speaking your truth and
letting go of the need for approval from
others how do we stop seeking approval
and follow what's true for us you know
it it's
interesting because I think that the
question itself the answer is reversed
so let me let me explain what I mean so
my daughters both of them went through
this at some point they're in their
teenage years and there's exclusion and
there's who likes who and did you get
invited to the party and blah blah blah
blah blah MH and at some point both of
my daughters realize that this is like a
really painful experience trying to make
sure that people like you and
and trying to make sure that you're
doing the right thing and etc etc is is
hard and so recently my youngest came to
me to talk to me about this and you know
what to do and we had a discussion about
it
and and this realization hit her in our
conversation which was she wasn't she
didn't really have friends if she had to
present a certain way and do a certain
thing and be a certain person then she
she didn't have friends she had like get
friends friends who were friends with
somebody who she was trying to be but it
wasn't friends with who she
was and I and when she saw that that was
the main cause of the pain her decision
was and I have to say with a lot of
Courage that she was going
[Music]
to um
just speak her
truth just say the thing that was true
to her she wasn't going to try to game
the system or worry about what somebody
thought her she was just going to be I
would call it like self-possessed she
was just going to be like Oh I'm going
to I'm going to be who I want to be in
this situation and let the chips fall
where they may and we talked about it a
couple weeks later
and what she recognized was
that she was
constantly looking for
approval
before and when she starts speaking her
truth she stopped looking for that
approval and the mechanism there is
fascinating to me
because if you speak your truth then
you're approving of yourself and you
don't have to go looking outside for it
right if you if you speak your truth you
say I this this thing that I'm saying
this that I'm feeling this perception of
the world is valuable I approve of it I
approve of it so much I'm going to speak
it I'm going to validate it so I don't
need to get validation outside I don't
need to get approval outside and if you
look around the world you'll see that
the people who aren't really looking for
your approval are the people who are
also not hedging what they say they're
being there they're being self-possessed
they're looking for the truth and the
idea often is how do I stop looking for
approval and speak my truth but the
reality is is like oftentimes it's
speaking your truth that is the cure for
seeking approval this is fascinating I
want to back up the train a little bit
because you know there's all kinds of
all over self-help World there are you
know posters with mountains and
skydivers on them that say things like
don't seek the approval of others seek
Your Truth or follow your truth and it's
sort of a like a moral prescription of
well this is obviously the optimal way
of being but what I'm just hearing is
that your daughters the the daughters of
a teacher of speaking one's truth yeah
were themselves not immune from going
through this experience no of we all
have to of having you know maybe not a
starting point but at some point having
the experience of seeking approval
externally yeah and then wrestling with
that what makes it that seeking approval
is ever a strategy if it's following
your truth that seems to be where a lot
of optimal paths take people yeah so
first of all [__] the morality of it
like you said something in there early
on which was
you know one way is better than the
other
way I don't know better is just not a
great word just one way feels better it
feels good and and being conscientious
of other people feels good it's just
abandoning what's true for you for other
people is what doesn't feel
good so but let's not do the moral
prescription of it yeah first of all so
that that's one thing and then uh the
second thing is yeah we are we are
geared to
be in tribes right we're geared to be in
groups and
so there is a natural pull for us
to a natural tension in our life of how
do we fit in and how do
we stand out how do we fit in and how do
we also be in our truth this is a
natural pull of push and pull in in in
all societies some bigger some greater
you know America has more let me stand
out and some societies have more let me
fit in but
the but generally that's the that's
that's where it comes from is there
there's a there's a really normal
strategy of it and I suspect that when
it's in when you're in a really
homogeneous group when you're there's
there's a certain sense of fulfillment
of fitting in and going along and it and
it and there's probably a correspondence
in your condition and what you've
learned to be right etc etc that that
helps with that but in our society
where you know we are that we're not
very homogeneous anymore you can find a
a group of people who will think
anything's kosher and and or anything is
not Kosher so it's I think that's that's
where it stems from the other way to
look at it is that there's a
story of Buddha which is very similar to
the story of Jesus goes out into the
desert you know Buddha sits under a tree
he gets the Temptations Buddha gets The
Temptations and one of The Temptations
was societal
Norms this is what Society thinks you
should do that's a
Temptation it's it's natural it's as
natural as the temptation to be wealthy
or be powerful or be wealthy and
Powerful to be safe or all of those are
Temptations they're Temptations because
they feel good in the moment there's a
quick fix to them but it's not a really
longterm solution I think especially
early in life as oh yeah as a baby as a
toddler as a it seems that there is a
developmental gradient from correct
external reference to internal reference
exactly yeah especially the first eight
years yeah but what's even interesting
about it if you look at the first eight
years there's a external reference but
there's also this deep connection with
what they want MH M so they can do both
it it it lets you see that the idea even
the idea that there's an external
connection and an internal connection is
a
construction and we live it we've all
had the experience of being outwardly
focused or inwardly focused but you can
be both you can and when you are then
that's very much you'll notice that
you'll be following your truth and
you'll be attuned to other people both
both important both feeling yeah both
good feelings yeah yeah every temper
tantrum is
you could say uh the mixing of the
internal external or the wrestling with
that frame to begin with maybe not
everyone but a lot of them yeah a lot of
them yeah yeah yeah that brings up the
question of you know so you've flipped
it around from you know following your
truth speaking your truth is the thing
that has the external need for
validation fall away because you are
validating yourself correct now how
would you know that what you're
perceiving as your truth is say
Intuition or conditioning or that it's
even yours yeah interestingly
somatically often when you're speaking
your truth it doesn't feel like
yours you know it feels more like
channeling or following your call or
something like that there there's
a there's a felt sense of surrender in
it almost this is way down the
line but there's this feeling of
surrender to it because you
know following that call speaking that
truth being in that surrender to the
experience to do anything else is just
painful you've done it so many times
that you realize oh that's the thing and
I need to do it so that so that's one
thing about it that's interesting is
that it it it doesn't feel like yours it
actually puts you when you're doing this
it naturally puts you in a space where
the
self disintegrates so the identity the
strong identity the def this the
identity that you have to defend starts
to
disintegrate and then there's the
question of of oh am I in
a am
I having immediate reaction because I'm
following my truth and that's Intuition
or am I having immediate reaction and
that's conditioning and it's going to
throw me into that [__] hole pattern
that I've thrown myself into a dozen
times and what I notice is that
it's a sematic experience to find that
out it's not an intellectual one and so
my my recommendation to most people is
just every time you make an immediate
decision pay attention to your body and
see what the difference is between the
two for me my experience is that my
heart closes down if I'm in conditioning
if I'm in unhealthy conditioning some
conditioning is great by the way right I
I want to be conditioned not to drink
hot coffee that's too damn hot
and that doesn't make me close down my
heart when I test to see that the that
my coffee is hot or not hot or
whatever but when I'm in a pattern of
say rebelling against Authority when I
was 28 years old man my heart had to
close down yeah if I'm in a pattern of
reacting to somebody the way I've
reacted to people when I felt abandoned
my heart has to close down yeah that's
that's an interesting point or the
sematic checking the sematics of it CU
if I'm if I'm speaking something that
is that later turns out to perhaps be
something I would Define as like the
wisdom that came through me in the
moment most likely there's a
vulnerability and openness to it maybe
even a bewilderment of did I just say
that yes is that what I really feel here
is that what I think is the stand I want
to take and that's a very different
thing from if I'm channeling say
the internalized morality of my tribe in
which case it feels a lot more like the
shield and the spear in front of a
failen of Warriors behind me and I'm
like oh yeah this is true yeah it's a
very different sematic experience yeah
that's right you have you have to defend
that's right and the the the amazing
thing is that often times when I'm
working with clients and they're talking
about how to speak their
truth one of the things that I notice is
that somatically often times at the
beginning there's a pucker to it oh my
God am I going to say that that's
usually like a great moment to know oh
yeah that's the thing to say it's not
like a huge oh my God fear thing it's
not like you deregulate yourself
disregulated it's just that little bit
of a pucker that might be the first
available Sensation that you get is that
I'm feeling resistance I'm feeling the
pucker what's under that what's coming
in that it's a very similar feeling to
walking out on stage in front of 100
people oh my gosh am I going to do this
the other thing is that when I see
people speak their truth often times the
beginning of it's very bumpy and one of
the things that I teach them is okay
really somatically make sure your heart
is open yeah the other thing to say
about the truth is that there's
something incredibly misleading about
your truth a baby wants to get a cup of
water and they're truth is to crawl one
time and then a little bit later their
truth is to
walk right so it's not about like truth
is in this is true and there's never a
time when it's not not yours like to to
speak your truth is it like I said it's
like a channeling there's something
about it that's very
non-personal and and it's you can feel
it as
non-personal and it's actually one of
the cool things is when you are doing
that on a regular basis when this is
your
practice one of the things that starts
to happen is that you stop taking things
personally because you're seeing that
like what's happening in your world
isn't particularly personal it's more of
a calling so to
speak so it's a very interesting it's a
really interesting practice because it
unfolds like a
meditation how you meditate on day one
is very different than how you
meditate 10 years in opens up a lot of
doors this practice is the same way oh I
have that calling I know my heart is
open I am in myself this is what I'm
meant to say even if I'm scared to say
it despite the
consequences yeah I think I've told this
story about one of the things that we've
done raising our girls is that we're
constantly having them reference
themselves
for we don't say good job you're smart
we say things you know they sayl at what
I did and like oh yeah what' you feel
about that oh feels so good like we're
constantly put putting like having them
reflect on their own experience because
there's a TR we have a trust in that
that their own experiences is what's
going to lead them better than what what
we
think we obviously there's some stuff
you got to do as a parent to hold
boundaries Etc it's the same thing when
I'm working with clients it's a
perpetual deconstruct constructing of
the thought process so they can see
themselves mhm and
so yeah it's just it's such an
interesting thing of how do you become
self-referential when you're born
self-referential you know it's such a
weird such a weird bit yeah yeah it's
like coming back around to the initial
place on the circle yeah you start
self-referential but self-referential in
reference to what like you do have an
environment you do have a social world
But ultimately looping that back
to what do I feel yeah so we had talked
a little bit about doubt earlier how
does doubt show up
in reference to Our Truth yeah so I was
working with a client recently super
successful alcoholic father like
me
and learned that every time Dad got
mad she could not get mad back so the
only Act of control of sovereignty she
could have was to say what did I do
wrong and I can't tell you I think it's
at least 60% of the people work this way
somebody gets mad at them either
aggressively mad at them or passively
aggressively mad at them and they go
what did I do wrong well I've been
seeing this a lot lately yeah oh yeah
and
so that's doubt and and by the way doubt
requires a closed
heart so closed down your heart the
anger should be going outward cuz you
should be like [__] you dad what the
[__] like I'm your kid don't do this to
me but you can't do that as a 5-year-old
so you say what did I do wrong anger
goes inward you start beating yourself
up and that's the doubt or you start
questioning
yourself if you're the other kind where
someone gets mad at you and that
immediately makes you angry that's the
other the other form of it I fall more
into that category um then you then you
rationalize and you justify
it's interesting the former there is
also there's something interesting in
the personal non-personal of it because
if I am to blame it's easy to see that
as well I'm just looking for what's
going on so I'm self- referencing
correct I'm referencing what I've done
wrong whatever I did wrong to deserve
this correct you don't even see it that
clearly usually you're just like what
did I do wrong I shouldn't have done
this blah blah blah blah you're not
actually most people don't even hook it
to the fact that oh someone yelled at me
and that's why I do this
most people don't even put that
connection together until they see
it if you're listening to this and you
have a problem with self-doubt just
notice is there ever been any time that
somebody has yelled at
you and you haven't gone into doubt how
many times can you literally point at
somebody who's been aggressive towards
you or passive aggressive towards you
and you were like yeah I didn't do
anything
wrong that's them I love asking clients
that they just blows their mind what
wait wait and they can't find it they
can't find one single time so apparently
anytime anybody's gotten mad at you it's
your fault doubt has a lot to do with oh
I'm trying to make sure that people are
happy and the reason that doubt is so
prevalent there is
because you can't [__] make people
happy so there's always a reason to
doubt you can always [__]
churn you can always go no that's not
the right decision maybe this maybe I
shouldn't have done it this way did
because somebody's always going to be
[__] unhappy with you always and and
and the same person may be unhappy with
you if you do number a thing and the
next day you do a thing and they're
happy with you and the next day you do a
thing and they're unhappy with you
because that's how humans
are they're happy because mostly because
of their own [__] not because of like
what you're doing yeah the funny thing
is that becomes especially true if that
person is doing a whole bunch of comp
complicated Game Theory just
reference a bunch of other people for
what they need in their life so that
what they think they need is changing
from moment to moment based on 30 other
people and it tends to happen less when
interacting with a person who is really
deeply self-referencing correct they
tend to appear more consistent and
there's a level of consistency that
develops over time which increases
people's trust with them and increases
their capacity to lead correct
definitely on the leadership side and
the other thing it does is it
makes the folks around them be more
consistent if you're volatile people
around you are on eggshells and so
they're very inconsistent if
you're if you're following your truth
and there's a stability to you a
groundedness to you that makes it so
that people lean in and trust
you yeah and and and so the the the
doubt comes in because you're
referencing outside the three main
reasons that people are not
following their truth is one doubt two
fear of the
consequences and three because they're
justifying conditioning they're
justifying a bad pattern and calling it
truth right those are the things that
seem to happen and in the doubt side of
it it's a lack of self-referencing and
in the the result oriented oh I'm scared
of the results that one's that one's
interesting because
mhm most people are thinking about a
decision as a single decision they're
thinking about it as a single bet and
it's the whole world is on that bet
instead of seeing it as a portfolio of
decisions if I'm investing and I'm like
thinking about my investment as one
investment I am far less likely to be
successful at as if I'm thinking about
as a portfolio and I know I'm going to
have some wins I know I'm going to have
some
losses so with my daughter she had some
losses because some of the things she
said didn't go well or somebody got
upset but the overall
result the portfolio was good the
portfolio was solid and oftentimes what
I hear people say is I made a bad
decision and you ask what makes that the
case because the results weren't
goodh that doesn't make any damn sense
to me
because put you put yourself at a
different company with a different boss
and that decision would have been great
results right it's another way of saying
I failed to predict the future right
because hold myself responsible for
predicting the future which if you're
looking at
investing and you know markets if you
try to predict the future you're screwed
right but what you can do is create a
system a process a portfolio that has
contingencies and that is likely to lead
to better outcomes over time and so in
in the realm of doubt it was about going
from the external reference to building
a deeper internal reference in this case
it's kind of going from focus on
consequences and outcomes to focus on
process yeah it's it's the same thing at
its core which
is say what's true for you it's the same
that the the thing is the same the the
the the hurdle to get there is different
and the way to overcome that hurdle is
to is to look at the process and say
okay I understand that if I do this
regularly and enough that the world will
move move itself to meet me it's just my
same with my daughter the world moved
itself to say oh you are now
self-possessed we will treat you as such
yeah or you are now loving yourself so
we're going to surround you with people
who love you the world does react to the
how we are it's not magical thinking
it's
just as simple as if you treat a dog one
way they're going to react differently
than if you treat a dog another way if
you treat your friend group one way
they're going to react different
mhm yeah
so that's an interesting segue to number
three because if we're talking about the
process rather than the outcomes yeah
then what process do we adopt be
grounded and openhearted and it's really
hard it it will hurt you not to speak
your
truth there you will feel the the pain
of it you know you're you listen to that
person you're like ooo man they just
spoke some truth like you feel that [__]
in your
body so for those listening who want
to want to develop a practice or want to
take a little homework from this from
this episode yeah enter the lives to
seek less
approval and Trust themselves more what
what are a couple of things that people
could do yeah the simple thing is
to have the practice of speaking your
truth even if it's uncomfortable and
make it just a little bit uncomfortable
two times a day so I two times a day I
jump in there and I drop the grenade and
I I run or like what what do I do with
it you can't do that if your heart is
open and you're and you're grounded say
the thing that's
scary you it would not feel good to run
you'd have to shut that all down to run
Mo under
circumstances so it's really it's such a
thing where there's no you can't
intellectually get there there's a
sematic component that is
required can I be fully in myself with
an open heart
undefended and say what I have to
say and if I do and I don't defend and I
stay grounded what's going to
happen and if you do that enough times
it becomes is really really apparent
when you aren't and when you are and the
other thing that you can do
is when you make an immediate decision
notice how your body feels and so you'll
start noticing oh is that Intuition or
is that patterning is that negative
patterning there's like I said there's
lots of conditioning that's great but is
this conditioning that throws me in
negative patterns there would be a very
specific felt sense to
it and so you can feel that when that's
happening and you can speak your truth
two times a day make it simple stuff and
then just get just keep on going bigger
and bigger and bigger and what would you
add for somebody who says I have a hard
time feeling myself especially when I'm
in that situation I close down and I
can't feel
anything you're
[__] no I wouldn't say that I would
say then your first job is to learn how
to feel your
body walk around for the next two weeks
keeping 10% of your attention in your
body
and if you're like I can't feel my
body smack yourself on the face and feel
your
cheek you know like tap your fingers
together and feel your fingers you can
feel your body everybody can that's like
saying how do I see unless you're blind
you can see
so spend time keeping 10% of your
attention in your body as much as
possible for two three
weeks that by the way that can be an
incredibly intense trip for people so be
gentle with yourself if you do
that part of me wants to ask a question
about weaponization like yeah I do um
how do we
not walk away from this and weaponize
the concept like I just speaking my
truth and not recognize we're in like a
deeply defensive State around it
or you know to your partner why aren't
you just speaking your truth stop being
so approval seeking right like what what
have you seen
with cents through this some of the
pitfalls that they might get into you
got to close your heart to do any of
that stuff again you've got to close
your heart it it it can be totally
weaponized you know I don't know there's
this thing called radical honesty which
I really appreciate but there's there's
a way you can take radical honesty to a
point where you are just being abusive
to
people
and I'm speaking my truth despite the
consequences is something I'm speaking
my truth in a way with a closed heart
and it hurts people is something else
and sometimes you speak your truth with
an open heart and people are going to
get hurt but when they are hurt if they
are like you see it you're like oh whoa
I didn't want to hurt you that's not
what I would meant to do here then your
truth will be like less prioritized
connection right yeah awesome awesome
thank you Joe pleasure Brett thank you
[Music]